greetings everyone around this twirling
planet of ours wherever you're listening
I hope you're enjoying the summer and
not allowing the heat to get you down
Lazlo Montgomery here bringing you
another episode from the China history
podcast com well two weeks ago we were
in the Western Han Dynasty then last
week we were in the air 1921 today's
episode looks at a giant among 20th
century giants of international business
entertainment and philanthropy he was
born during the reign of the Ching
dynasty Emperor Guan shoe and 11 years
before protesters took to the streets to
ignite the May fourth movement in 1919
and 11 years into the 21st century this
venerable gentleman knighted by the
Queen of England in 1977 is still alive
and well now some of you hardcore China
history buffs are probably wondering
what's up with that run run Shaw what's
that got to do with Chinese history well
let me just say I've been a longtime
admirer of sha yi fool since before I
started seriously studying China back in
the 80s as a teenager I had been exposed
to movies produced by the shop brothers
and their ripoff of the Warner Brothers
logo was always indelibly stamped in my
memory I don't know where I first saw
sir run run shaw's name in a movie
credit or magazine I don't know but the
first time I heard it I never forgot it
run run shaw how can you forget that
name so his life is the focus of our
podcast today he was born in nineteen oh
seven five years before the last Ching
Emperor abdicated this was the Chinese
year 4605 the year of the Sheep Charlie
Chaplin had yet to even make his film
debut and making a living that was the
same year Marconi's long-wave wireless
opened up instantaneous transatlantic
communication he was 11 years old when
the May fourth protests happened he was
20 when John kai-shek launched the
northern expedition after massacring the
communists with a little help from big
air do he was 27 when the Long March be
he was 38 when World War two ended and
42 when my land the Communists liberated
China he was 49 when my launched the
hundred Flowers campaign and 69 when the
Cultural Revolution ended 1976 and just
before his 90th birthday he witnessed
the handover of hong kong to china he's
been around to not only witness the
china economic miracle but also to play
a front and center role as one of the
movers and shakers about highest layers
of government and industry and he's
still going strong he'll be a hundred
and four this november or october
depending on which story is the correct
one he's been around a very very long
time and has witnessed a lot of chinese
history over the course of his life he's
given away vast amounts of money to
causes that have been dear to his heart
when the 2008 great sichuan earthquake
happened one of his charitable
foundations gave a hundred million hong
kong dollars he doesn't get out like he
once did but I'm sure wherever he is he
can reflect on a life well-lived and be
thankful for not only witnessing so much
change turbulence and history in his
lifetime but actually being a historic
personage in his own right so let's look
at the magnificent life of sir run run
shaw the earliest you could trace the
Shaw family is back to the time of the
Hong rule Emperor of the Ming Dynasty
the home woo Emperor you'll no doubt
recall was in fact none other than Julia
and John the founder of the dynasty run
run shaw's ancient relative who came
from ghetto up in Shandong province
which was maybe a five or six hour walk
to chew food the birthplace of Confucius
this ancient relative was given the
governorship of the county of geun-hye
in ningbo in judge young province and
then around seventeen generations later
comes our hero shall you foo son of the
wealthy pigments and textile dyeing
magnet shall you shen the surname sha
fourth tone this was angliss
to sha sha w for whatever reason
definitely easier for foreigners that
shawl run run shaw was the sixth of six
brothers this explains why he was known
in the Cantonese speaking world as look
so for sixth uncle four of the six
brothers were involved in the business
that came to be known Shaw Brothers
Studio and of these four two of them
were perhaps more involved than the
others you had Renji shouts a one-run d
shout siren run me shall Ren Mei and
last but not least run run or shall
renren but he was better known as shall
ye foo I explained a couple dozen
podcasts ago how Chinese especially the
more educated and opera class types
would often change their names for
various reasons so there were four Shaw
Brothers involved in the movie business
which began in 1925 as the TE film
company in Shanghai China at this time
is in a state of flux Sun yat-sen died
in this year from cancer and now a new
guy Zhang Kai shek was the main power in
republican era China we're in between
world war 1 in world war two these were
the legendary and infamous bad old days
of 1920s and 30s Shanghai that have
spawned a million unforgettable
photographs stories legends and
Hollywood productions run run shaw and a
few of his brother set up the studio to
take advantage of this new motion
picture technology and feed it to a
market starving for exactly this kind of
entertainment so from this studio they
started to make all these silent films
they made the movies and they
distributed them and later showed them
in their own theaters now run run shaw
shall you fool he's barely 18 years old
when all this starts getting cranked up
so here he is he's the he's the youngest
of six brothers all born from this very
rich father who made his money and
manufacturing and he's getting his start
now it's 1924 1925 now shall you shen
the patriarch he was as traditional a
chinese as you could get later on is
youngest son and the topic of today's
podcast episode will bring philanthropy
to great heights but it was shall you
shun who set an example to run run shaw
no doubt all his sons that with great
wealth also comes great responsibility
it was more than the Shah brothers who
benefited from their father's money
shall you shen gave generously to
society to those most in need he didn't
live like an ascetic or anything but he
did live simply and frugally and the
last thing he wanted to hear was that
his sons wanted to go invest in this
totally new entertainment business there
was no use trying to explain this they
had to keep this hush-hush from their
very conservative father shanghai in the
1920s i mean if you thought China was
booming now 1920 Shanghai in between the
wars warlords running the place no
central authority the massive market all
that limitless potential times were
changing fast and people were on the go
constantly same in the USA the
conditions in the u.s. that led to the
creation of the movie business in 1908
were the same in China in the 1920s
people wanted to be entertained I don't
know which one of the brothers came up
with the idea first but 1925 they
realized there was also a huge an even
more affluent market of Chinese who
would enjoy the same movies that were
hot in Shanghai the plethora of wachau
or overseas Chinese who populated
Singapore Hong Kong Malaysia Thailand
Vietnam Indonesia that was the future so
with an eye on this future the third
brother run me shall Ren Mei he heads to
Singapore and this is pre Singapore
Airlines days you didn't just hop on a
plane back in 1925 it was quite a major
production to get from ningbo to
Singapore the eldest son Renji shall j1
he remained in charge of the Shanghai
Tian Yi studio the English name was
called unique film productions now today
we're focusing on sir run run shaw but i
just wanted to say this eldest Shah
brother raunchy Shah he was truly
another incredible person multi-talented
a business genius and anyway lived an
amazing
rich life so run me Shaw he gets to
Singapore and has his hands full getting
the lay of the land and figuring out how
to conquer the world or at least the
world of the overseas Chinese
entertainment market China was a big
market and they already had a toehold
there but it was getting too limiting in
some respects and sooner or later the
competition in Shanghai would get the
same idea about exploiting the Southeast
Asian wachau entertainment market he
sets up an office on Robinson Road in
Singapore and two years later in 1927
run run shaw only 20 years old he joins
brother run me in the Lion City singha
puta now Singapore is a tiny place on
the tip of the Malaysian Peninsula the
population of singapore today is about
the same as Queens and Brooklyn combined
so my point is the domestic market in
Singapore isn't too big and when the two
Shaw Brothers were trying to carve out
their niche there was quite a bit of
cutthroat competition already there
controlling their piece of what amounted
to a very small pie the Shaw's just
didn't walk in like Caesar did in
northern turkey against farness ease the
second and 47 BC this was a long hard
slog to establish a beachhead in
Singapore and soon after in Malaya not
that it was any easier in Shanghai the
heir to the Shaw Brothers faced every
imaginable kind of roadblock trying to
make an honest buck producing movies
these were very rough times and I'm sure
they had to put up with all manners of
gangsters and government officials
always looking for some kind of how true
or something once run run shaw's in
Singapore they opened their first
theater which let me tell you was
nothing more than old building with a
white sheet hanging down to serve as a
screen it was more or less what you've
seen before in any movie or TV show that
depicts the embryonic years of the
movies this was how they were able to
stay alive they charge for tickets and
like any other business whatever was
left over from the revenue after all
expenses went into their pockets once
the Shaw Brothers established themselves
in Singapore run me Shah went north to
Malaya as it was called back then and
went to
all the markets in selangor kuala lumpur
ipoh penang melaka all their movies
everywhere was a big hit things grew
very quickly they were building cinemas
all over singapore in Malaya and a lot
of their profits were plowed into real
estate they set up shop in Hong Kong in
1934 runde Shah ran that operation which
operated as nanyang or South Sea studio
unbeknownst the Shaw Brothers the
Japanese would invade Shanghai a few
years later in august of 1937 and that
as you can imagine put a bit of a damper
on operations in china so now hong kong
becomes more important than ever to the
shaws their first studio was on buck
Thai Street in tok wawan a few blocks
away i might add from the may walk on
Yip Chun some and told want though where
I used to take a bus to work for five
years little did I know that studio
later burned down was replaced in the
1960s with another studio that we'll get
to in a second the 1930s was when movie
started to have sound to the age of
talking pictures had come to Southeast
Asia it was definitely a great leap
forward compared to silent films and it
brought in even more droves of customers
looking for that great escape that
movies gave you now not only did the
Shahs produce their own movies but they
distributed movies as well these
included western films the early to mid
30s those were rough times in Singapore
as they were everywhere the Great
Depression took a while to wear off
those were rather lean years for the
Shahs but they got through it alive and
by the late 30s things were booming
again in China the warlord era was over
but the nation was still dealing with
the twin terrors of the Japanese
invasions and the nationalist communists
fighting the Shahs got into other
businesses and their wealth continued to
grow their core business was still
entertainment making and distributing
movies that a hundred and forty theaters
across Southeast Asia and they also
operated amusement parks run run shaw
like all his brothers and their families
they weathered the storm of world
or two from Singapore because of the
propaganda value the Japanese after
defeating the British forces seized all
the Shah movie assets and the brothers
like many other industrialists were
forced to work for the Japanese and do
their bidding the post-world war two
boom years were kind to the Shahs in
1957 run run Shaw took over as head of
the Hong Kong operation from his older
brother runde when run run Shaw takes
over the studio operations things really
start to boon for the company not only
was run run shaw able to consistently
feed their network of cinemas with a
steady stream of content he also signed
deals as the exclusive distributor of
pictures produced in the US by warner
brothers universal united artists in the
early 1950s he aggressively promoted the
best of Shaw's productions
internationally through the medium of
film festivals the genius of run run
Shaw and his brothers and the way they
promoted their films in Malaya and
Singapore in Hong Kong and Indonesia was
incredible they utilized all the
synergies between their cinema halls
their printing operations their
amusement parks and live theater to
promote the business during the 1960's
the Shah organization was unstoppable in
the most powerful force in Chinese
language movies and the distribution of
foreign films including Hollywood
productions run run shaw's name was
synonymous with movies and entertainment
however he wasn't alone by any means
there were other big fish in the movie
business among them the suave legendary
Renaissance man a great tycoon and noted
ornithologist Luo Yin Khao Lak 1 po of
the cafe organization they were always
breathing down the neck of the Shaw's
trying to one-up them or be faster to
market with the latest star technology
1957 was a big year in addition to the
conclusion of China's first five-year
plan and mouse anti rightist campaign
the infamous faneuil PI Eun dong run run
shaw in a very gutsy move bought 46
akers up in a part of kowloon known as
clear water bay fear he built the
largest private film studio in the world
called movie town finished in 1961 over
the next few decades over a thousand
movies were squeezed out of this
state-of-the-art operation the
brainchild of run run shaw there was no
stopping them after this with these
kinds of facilities now at their
disposal run run shaw took chinese films
to a new level of respectability and
technical achievement like I said the
Shaw's weren't the only ones in the
movie making business ever since the
earliest days when the brothers began
their Enterprise 1920 Shanghai there
were plenty of others with the same idea
all throughout their history the Shaw's
always had the competition breathing
down their neck they faced social
upheavals nationalism tragedy and
triumph sometimes they beat the
competition and sometimes it was the
other studios who beat them from this
new facility in Hong Kong run run Shaw
had positioned the company to become a
serious contender not only in their home
chinese-language market but
internationally as well in the early
1960s all Shaw movies were filmed in
color and they were the ones who were
credited with bringing color pictures to
the Chinese language market they were
the pioneers in the east for this
exciting new technology that everyone
takes for granted now there was nothing
like this anywhere in Asia this was as
good and as sophisticated as anything
you could find in Hollywood Shaw movies
left the competition in the dust so much
attention was paid to quality technical
aspects and post production while the
competition was still using the same old
formulas and methods the Shaw's
bankrolled their pictures with big money
to finance the cost of the higher
quality productions the 1960s also saw
the proliferation of kung fu movies I
mean they're big today and they were big
back then to not only Chinese audiences
but international audience as well love
the idea of a humble martial arts expert
antihero defending the pole
downtrodden against the mighty and more
powerful Shaw studios were pumping out
dozens of these wildly popular kung fu
movies the japanese film directors they
had been making these similar samurai
movies since the 1950s run run shaw had
seen the appeal these movies head to
mass audiences and gave him inspiration
to bring the richness of Chinese Kung Fu
to the big screen run run Shaw took the
company public in 1971 by this time the
whole organization was vast and
extremely sophisticated run run shaw was
a hands-on micromanaging boss his
right-hand man it was a guy named
Raymond chow zol win why he was chief of
publicity and production between
nineteen fifty eight to nineteen seventy
he left Sean 1972 found his own
fledgling studio called golden harvest
for a number of reasons Raymond chow
left Shaw and struck gold oil and
diamonds all in one with the discovery
of a guy by the name of li xiao long li
xiao long was an up-and-coming kung-fu
actor who had made it big in the US as
an actor in a popular TV show Leisha
along not only had the martial arts
aspect down but also the acting skills
as well run run shaw wasn't willing to
pay this guy what he wanted first so
Raymond chow in his small dilapidated
studio trying to get up off his knees it
gets such a giant as his old boss run
run shaw he took a chance with Leisha
along and you could say that hunch paid
off leash along of course is none other
than bruce lee and the US TV program of
course was the Green Hornet not only did
bruce lee's movies launch golden harvest
as a major contender in the business but
also took the whole kung fu genre to new
heights internationally 1973 saw the
release in the US of five fingers of
death Kid shot de Chen it came out in
Hong Kong first 1972 and starred the
first kung fu superstar lawliet pissed
along with Bruce Lee's fists of fury and
enter the dragon
were what sparked the whole kung fu film
invasion into the USA five fingers of
death also known as the boxer was a
smashing success for Shaw Brothers but
nonetheless run run Shaw head somehow
let a real big fish slip away and losing
Bruce Lee to the competition and Golden
Harvest milked the craze for Bruce Lee
movies all the way to the bank even
though Bruce Lee would die tragically
young in 1973 right when the whole
kungfu craze was taking off run run shaw
was like a factory manager and that his
modern mega studio was a totally
self-contained vertically integrated
operation with run run Shaw at the top
managing every aspect of the business it
was a factory that churned out content
that was shown to the public in Shaw
owned or operated theaters by the 1970s
once the Hong Kong riots were nothing
but a bad memory real estate prices
exploded in Hong Kong and his television
became a more popular alternative to the
movies many of these grand Shaw cinemas
were torn down and developed the real
estate value and of course this enriched
the Shaw organization even further I'm
not going to get into any names here but
Shaw Brothers created a lot of stars
almost all the brightest shining stars
in the world of Chinese language movies
came from Shaw Brothers I have to
believe run run shaw knew he was the
envy of almost every man so often
photographed like any other Hollywood
mogul with a bevy of beauties and
starlets on each arm appearing at grand
openings of pictures awards ceremonies
and the like run run shaw was in his
prime in these days although you can say
in a way he was always in his prime is
his organization saw this explosion of
growth in the 70s he was already a man
well into his sixth decade by the time
the 70s were in full swing Shaw Brothers
operated 230 movie theaters all across
Asia and even in the US and Canada from
there
beginnings trying to get off the ground
in Shanghai in 1925 Shaw Brothers had
now become one of the largest if not the
largest movie distributor in the world
with their fingers and movie pies and
all the great markets of Southeast Asia
Hollywood and India 1967 was a big year
for run run shaw and the entire shaw
organization in this tumultuous year in
hong kong history run run shaw launched
TVB or television broadcasts it is and
always has been the premier leading TV
station in Hong Kong when I lived there
in the 90s they had something like
seventy percent market share and I'm
sure it's still not doing too bad so run
run shaw sets up TVB and of course there
are a thousand and one synergies between
producing shows for TV and making movies
earlier this year in January 2011 sir
run run shaw sold most of his 32 and a
half percent stake in TVB which netted
him about a billion dollars telling you
the man still got it even at the age of
103 the 1980s saw the emergence of the
second generation of Shahs these were
the children of the six brothers during
these years and for sure during the
1990s when i was living in Hong Kong run
run shaw's influence could be seen
everywhere you could see the magnitude
of his generosity with all the hospitals
schools and whatnot that his foundations
provided for the Shah foundation Hong
Kong was set up in 1973 and has been a
friend to so many people who have
benefited from the Foundation's
generosity especially in China where
most of the projects and funded the Shah
foundation spreads its wealth but
funding programs and scholarships in
China in Europe and the US he's been
especially generous with the chinese
university of hong kong located up in
the New Territories and his name is
often synonymous with this prestigious
institution and he never forgot where he
came from either
if you remember the podcast from
September last year on li kai shang both
li and run run shaw were typical tycoons
who showered their hometowns with
hospital's medical schools universities
and other forms of generosity and
kindness the largesse of run run shaw's
philanthropy can be seen all around his
hometown of ningbo and around jaejoong
province by the 90s shaw brothers had
managed to grind out over 900 movie
titles with the turn of the century in
2760 titles from this magnificent
library of filmed was sold to celestial
pictures 484 million us sir run run
shaw's first wife huangmei chun passed
away in 1987 and 10 years later in Las
Vegas he remarried looking fabulous at
the age of 90 his second wife is the
very smart talented and business savvy
Mona fong fong aha who had played a key
role in the TVB organization serving as
deputy chairman and now as general
manager of TVB she was a longtime Hong
engg to serve run run shaw which roughly
translates to close confidant the Shah
organization today is about three and a
half billion u.s. dollars in size from
their modest start in 1925 when China
was in the hands of greedy and
self-serving warlords sir run run Shaw
and his brothers together built an
empire that today is vast diversified
business interests and entertainment
banking real estate in hotels and they
operate on every inhabited continent on
the planet in 2002 run run shaw set up
the shaw prize this is a 1 million
dollar prize given out annually to those
scientists who are chosen for their
achievements in the three fields of
astronomy mathematics and medical
sciences but sometimes referred to as
the nobel prize of the east it's
administered by the Shah foundation
in Hong Kong there was a bit of a scare
last year when run run Shaw had a spell
of pneumonia and was hospitalized for an
extended period but look soap or sixth
uncle as he is affectionately known by
so many is still around and still
serving in the capacity of executive
chairman of TVB one of the things dear
to the heart of run run shaw with all
this movie making and entertainment was
to bring the beauty the splendor
sophistication and uniqueness of chinese
culture to the world he had that drive
in him for such a long time Chinese
cinema had been relegated to the Chinese
markets and the Chinatown's of the world
run run shaw sought to change all that
and turn Chinese entertainment otoo you
know something that appealed to an
international audience of the four main
Shaw Brothers involved in this amazing
family story runde passed away first in
1973 followed by runchy in February of
1975 and run Misha 1985 sir run run is
the last of the four brothers who played
such an important role in Chinese
cultural history introducing so much of
this culture to the world they weren't
the first Chinese to make movies and you
can argue all day about who was the best
but they were certainly the most famous
although the fortune run run shaw built
over the years doesn't match the size of
some of the other big tycoons his story
is in this humble narrator's opinion by
far the most fascinating the man known
by so many as six tunkel is truly a
treasure in the annals of chinese
history and the fact that he's turning
104 years old in a few more months makes
them even more appealing and fascinating
a person it's the Year 2011 now and
those Chinese still living who could say
they witnessed some of the historic
moments in modern Chinese history that
went on right after the Ching dynasty
fell well they're almost all gone almost
all of them
although he's very frail now and can't
see well doesn't get out too much I'm
sure he's comforted and can enjoy the
satisfaction in his old age of having
lived a very good life and to have
enjoyed everything in life there is to
enjoy quite a legacy he leaves there
were six Shaw Brothers four of whom were
active in the business and left their
mark but it was one the youngest who
became the most renowned and the face of
Shaw Brothers sir run run shaw as a
dilettante history podcaster I think of
surrender and Sean what it must be like
to have lived this long almost a hundred
and four years seeing all he's seen a
figure of most people start remembering
things when they're five years old he's
been cognizant of everything that
happened in China since at least right
after Puyi abdicated that's quite a
point of reference I wonder what he
thinks when he looks at China today
where does he think China's going having
seen with his own eyes how far it's
common his long lifetime and so that's
it for now everyone if you were hoping
for something about Emperor's battles or
great events in Chinese history I hope
you're not leaving disappointed I hope
you all enjoyed that and I'd like to
apologize again for last week's
technical problem with the audio I know
a lot of you were wondering what
happened to the other part of the
podcast fortunately my listeners Stephen
C notified me of the problem and I
rerecorded the part that got cut off and
reup debt so sorry about that some sort
of garageband problem it took an entire
evening to solve and so from a baking
hot Claremont California this is your
humble narrator Lazlo Montgomery wishing
you all the best wherever you are join
us next week won't you for another
exciting episode of the China history
podcast